# D. Compatibility analysis of ANS Forth (informative annex)

Prior to ANS Forth, there were several industry standards for Forth.  The most influential are listed here in chronological order, along with the major differences between ANS Forth and the most recent, Forth 83.

## D.1 FIG Forth (circa 1978) 

(FIG). In FIG Forth, a relatively small number of words were implemented in processor-dependent machine 
FIG Forth was a “model” implementation of the Forth language developed by the Forth Interest Group  language and the rest of the words were implemented in Forth. The FIG model was placed in the public  domain, and was ported to a wide variety of computer systems. Because the bulk of the FIG Forth  implementation was the same across all machines, programs written in FIG Forth enjoyed a substantial  degree of portability, even for “system-level” programs that directly manipulate the internals of the Forth  system implementation.
FIG Forth implementations were influential in increasing the number of people interested in using Forth.
Many people associate the implementation techniques embodied in the FIG Forth model with “the nature of  Forth”.
However, FIG Forth was not necessarily representative of commercial Forth implementations of the same  era. Some of the most successful commercial Forth systems used implementation techniques different from  the FIG Forth “model”.

## D.2 Forth 79 

The Forth-79 Standard resulted from a series of meetings from 1978 to 1980, by the Forth Standards Team,  an international group of Forth users and vendors (interim versions known as Forth 77 and Forth 78 were  also released by the group).
Forth 79 described a set of words defined on a 16-bit, twos-complement, unaligned, linear byte-addressing  virtual machine. It prescribed an implementation technique known as “indirect threaded code”, and used the  ASCII character set.
The Forth-79 Standard served as the basis for several public domain and commercial implementations,  some of which are still available and supported today.

## D.3 Forth 83 

The Forth-83 Standard, also by the Forth Standards Team, was released in 1983. Forth 83 attempted to fix  some of the deficiencies of Forth 79.
Forth 83 was similar to Forth 79 in most respects. However, Forth 83 changed the definition of several  well-defined features of Forth 79. For example, the rounding behavior of integer division, the base value of  the operands of PICK and ROLL, the meaning of the address returned by ', the compilation behavior of ',  the value of a “true” flag, the meaning of NOT, and the “chaining” behavior of words defined by  VOCABULARY were all changed. Forth 83 relaxed the implementation restrictions of Forth 79 to allow any  kind of threaded code, but it did not fully allow compilation to native machine code (this was not  specifically prohibited, but rather was an indirect consequence of another provision).
Many new Forth implementations were based on the Forth-83 Standard, but few “strictly compliant”  Forth-83 implementations exist.
Although the incompatibilities resulting from the changes between Forth 79 and Forth 83 were usually  relatively easy to fix, a number of successful Forth vendors did not convert their implementations to be  Forth 83 compliant. For example, the most successful commercial Forth for Apple Macintosh computers is  based on Forth 79.

## D.4 Recent developments 

Since the Forth-83 Standard was published, the computer industry has undergone rapid and profound  changes. The speed, memory capacity, and disk capacity of affordable personal computers have increased  by factors of more than 100. 8-bit processors have given way to 16-bit processors, and now 32-bit  processors are commonplace.
The operating systems and programming-language environments of small systems are much more powerful  than they were in the early 80’s.
The personal-computer marketplace has changed from a predominantly “hobbyist” market to a mature  business and commercial market.
Improved technology for designing custom microprocessors has resulted in the design of numerous “Forth  chips”, computers optimized for the execution of the Forth language.
The market for ROM-based embedded control computers has grown substantially.
In order to take full advantage of this evolving technology, and to better compete with other programming  languages, many recent Forth implementations have ignored some of the “rules” of previous Forth  standards. In particular:  – 32-bit Forth implementations are now common.
– Some Forth systems adopt the address-alignment restrictions of the hardware on which they run.
– Some Forth systems use native-code generation, microcode generation, and optimization techniques, 
rather than the traditional “threaded code”.
– Some Forth systems exploit segmented addressing architectures, placing portions of the Forth 
“dictionary” in different segments.
– More and more Forth systems now run in the environment of another “standard” operating system, 
using OS text files for source code, rather than the traditional Forth “blocks”.
– Some Forth systems allow external operating system software, windowing software, terminal 
concentrators, or communications channels to handle or preprocess user input, resulting in deviations  from the input editing, character set availability, and screen management behavior prescribed by  Forth 83.
Competitive pressure from other programming languages (predominantly “C”) and from other Forth  vendors have led Forth vendors to optimizations that do not fit in well with the “virtual machine model”  implied by existing Forth standards.

## D.5 ANS Forth approach 

The ANS Forth committee addressed the serious fragmentation of the Forth community caused by the  differences between Forth 79 and Forth 83, and the divergence from either of these two industry standards  caused by marketplace pressures.
Consequently, the committee has chosen to base its compatibility decisions not upon a strict comparison  with the Forth-83 Standard, but instead upon consideration of the variety of existing implementations,  especially those with substantial user bases and/or considerable success in the marketplace.
The committee feels that, if ANS Forth prescribes stringent requirements upon the virtual machine model,  as did the previous standards, then many implementors will chose not to comply with ANS Forth. The  committee hopes that ANS Forth will serve to unify rather than to further divide the Forth community, and  thus has chosen to encompass rather than invalidate popular implementation techniques.
Many of the changes from Forth 83 are justified by this rationale. Most fall into the category that “an ANS  Forth Standard Program may not assume x”, where “x” is an entitlement resulting from the virtual machine  model prescribed by the Forth-83 Standard. The committee feels that these restrictions are reasonable,  especially considering that a substantial number of existing Forth implementations do not correctly  implement the Forth-83 virtual model, thus the Forth-83 entitlements exist “in theory” but not “in practice”.
Another way of looking at this is that while ANS Forth acknowledges the diversity of current Forth practice,  it attempts to document the similarity therein. In some sense, ANS Forth is thus a “description of reality”  rather than a “prescription for a particular virtual machine”.
Since there is no previous American National Standard for Forth, the action requirements prescribed by  section 3.4 of X3/SD-9, “Policy and Guidelines”, regarding previous standards do not apply.
The following discussion describes differences between ANS Forth and Forth 83. In most cases, Forth 83 is  representative of Forth 79 and FIG Forth for the purposes of this discussion. In many of these cases,  however, ANS Forth is more representative of the existing state of the Forth industry than the previouslypublished standards.

## D.6 Differences from Forth 83 


### D.6.1 Stack width 

Forth 83 specifies that stack items occupy 16 bits. This includes addresses, flags, and numbers. ANS Forth  specifies that stack items are at least 16 bits; the actual size must be documented by the implementation.
Words affected: all arithmetic, logical and addressing operators  Reason: 32-bit machines are becoming commonplace. A 16-bit Forth system on a 32-bit  machine is not competitive.
Impact: Programs that assume 16-bit stack width will continue to run on 16-bit machines;  ANS Forth does not require a different stack width, but simply allows it. Many programs will be unaffected  (but see “address unit”).
1 CONSTANT LO-BIT 
: LO-BITS ( n -- mask ) 0 SWAP 0 ?DO 1 LSHIFT LO-BIT OR LOOP ; 
: HI-BITS ( n -- mask ) 0 SWAP 0 ?DO 1 RSHIFT HI-BIT OR LOOP ; 
Transition/Conversion: Programs which use bit masks with the high bits set may have to be changed,  substituting either an implementation-defined bit-mask constant, or a procedure to calculate a bit mask in a  stack-width-independent way. Here are some procedures for constructing width-independent bit masks:  TRUE 1 RSHIFT INVERT CONSTANT HI-BIT  Programs that depend upon the “modulo 65536” behavior implicit in 16-bit arithmetic operations will need  to be rewritten to explicitly perform the modulus operation in the appropriate places. The committee  believes that such assumptions occur infrequently. Examples: some checksum or CRC calculations, some  random number generators and most fixed-point fractional math.

### D.6.2 Number representation 

Forth 83 specifies two’s-complement number representation and arithmetic. ANS Forth also allows one’scomplement and signed-magnitude.
Words affected: all arithmetic and logical operators, LOOP, +LOOP Reason: Some computers use one’s-complement or signed-magnitude. The committee  did not wish to force Forth implementations for those machines to emulate two’s-complement arithmetic,  and thus incur severe performance penalties. The experience of some committee members with such  machines indicates that the usage restrictions necessary to support their number representations are not  overly burdensome.
Impact: An ANS Forth Standard Program may declare an “environmental dependency on  two’s-complement arithmetic”. This means that the otherwise-Standard Program is only guaranteed to work  on two’s-complement machines. Effectively, this is not a severe restriction, because the overwhelming  majority of current computers use two’s-complement. The committee knows of no Forth-83 compliant  implementations for non-two’s-complement machines at present, so existing Forth-83 programs will still  work on the same class of machines on which they currently work.
Transition/Conversion: Existing programs wishing to take advantage of the possibility of ANS Forth  Standard Systems on non-two’s-complement machines may do so by eliminating the use of arithmetic  operators to perform logical functions, by deriving bit-mask constants from bit operations as described in  the section about stack width, by restricting the usage range of unsigned numbers to the range of positive  numbers, and by using the provided operators for conversion from single numbers to double numbers.

### D.6.3 Address units 

Forth 83 specifies that each unique address refers to an 8-bit byte in memory. ANS Forth specifies that the  size of the item referred to by each unique address is implementation-defined, but, by default, is the size of  one character. Forth 83 describes many memory operations in terms of a number of bytes. ANS Forth  describes those operations in terms of a number of either characters or address units.
Words affected: those with “address unit” arguments  Reason: Some machines, including the most popular Forth chip, address 16-bit memory  locations instead of 8-bit bytes.
Impact: Programs may choose to declare an environmental dependency on byte  addressing, and will continue to work on the class of machines for which they now work. In order for a  Forth implementation on a word-addressed machine to be Forth 83 compliant, it would have to simulate  byte addressing at considerable cost in speed and memory efficiency. The committee knows of no such  Forth-83 implementations for such machines, thus an environmental dependency on byte addressing does  not restrict a Standard Program beyond its current de facto restrictions.
Transition/Conversion: The new CHARS and CHAR+ address arithmetic operators should be used for  programs that require portability to non-byte-addressed machines. The places where such conversion is  necessary may be identified by searching for occurrences of words that accept a number of address units as  an argument (e.g., MOVE , ALLOT).

### D.6.4 Address increment for a cell is no longer two 

As a consequence of Forth-83’s simultaneous specification of 16-bit stack width and byte addressing, the  number two could reliably be used in address calculations involving memory arrays containing items from  the stack. Since ANS Forth requires neither 16-bit stack width nor byte addressing, the number two is no  longer necessarily appropriate for such calculations.
Words affected: @ ! +! 2+ 2* 2- +LOOP Reason: See reasons for “Address Units” and “Stack Width”  Impact: In this respect, existing programs will continue to work on machines where a  stack cell occupies two address units when stored in memory. This includes most machines for which  Forth 83 compliant implementations currently exist. In principle, it would also include 16-bit-wordaddressed machines with 32-bit stack width, but the committee knows of no examples of such machines.
 Old New 
2+ or 2 + CELL+ 
2* or 2 * CELLS 
2- or 2 - 1 CELLS - 
2/ or 2 / 1 CELLS / 
2 1 CELLS 
Transition/Conversion: The new CELLS and CELL+ address arithmetic operators should be used for  portable programs. The places where such conversion is necessary may be identified by searching for the  character “2” and determining whether or not it is used as part of an address calculation. The following  substitutions are appropriate within address calculations:  The number “2” by itself is sometimes used for address calculations as an argument to +LOOP, when the  loop index is an address. When converting the word 2/ which operates on negative dividends, one should  be cognizant of the rounding method used.

### D.6.5 Address alignment 

Forth 83 imposes no restriction upon the alignment of addresses to any boundary. ANS Forth specifies that  a Standard System may require alignment of addresses for use with various “@” and “!” operators.
Words Affected: ! +! 2! 2@ @ ? , Reason: Many computers have hardware restrictions that favor the use of aligned  addresses. On some machines, the native memory-access instructions will cause an exception trap if used  with an unaligned address. Even on machines where unaligned accesses do not cause exception traps,  aligned accesses are usually faster.
“@” and “!” words must return aligned addresses. In most cases, there will be no problem. Problems can 
Impact: All of the ANS Forth words that return addresses suitable for use with aligned  arise from the use of user-defined data structures containing a mixture of character data and cell-sized data.
Many existing Forth systems, especially those currently in use on computers with strong alignment  requirements, already require alignment. Much existing Forth code that is currently in use on such  machines has already been converted for use in an aligned environment.
Transition/Conversion: There are two possible approaches to conversion of programs for use on a system  requiring address alignment.
: @ ( addr -- x ) DUP C@ SWAP CHAR+ C@ 8 LSHIFT OR ; 
: ! ( x addr -- ) OVER 8 RSHIFT OVER CHAR+ C! C! ; 
The easiest approach is to redefine the system’s aligned “@” and “!” operators so that they do not require  alignment. For example, on a 16-bit little-endian byte-addressed machine, unaligned “@” and “!” could be  defined:  These definitions, and similar ones for “+!”, “2@”, “2!”, “,”, and “?” as needed, can be compiled before  an unaligned application, which will then work as expected.
This approach may conserve memory if the application uses substantial numbers of data structures  containing unaligned fields.
(other than simple variables) are defined, or by “smart compiler” techniques (see the “Smart Compiler” 
Another approach is to modify the application’s source code to eliminate unaligned data fields. The ANS  Forth words ALIGN and ALIGNED may be used to force alignment of data fields. The places where such  alignment is needed may be determined by inspecting the parts of the application where data structures  discussion below).
This approach will probably result in faster application execution speed, at the possible expense of  increased memory utilization for data structures.
Finally, it is possible to combine the preceding techniques by identifying exactly those data fields that are  unaligned, and using “unaligned” versions of the memory access operators for only those fields. This  “hybrid” approach affects a compromise between execution speed and memory utilization.

### D.6.6 Division/modulus rounding direction 

Forth 79 specifies that division rounds toward 0 and the remainder carries the sign of the dividend. Forth 83  specifies that division rounds toward negative infinity and the remainder carries the sign of the divisor.
ANS Forth allows either behavior for the division operators listed below, at the discretion of the  implementor, and provides a pair of division primitives to allow the user to synthesize either explicit  behavior.
Words Affected: / MOD /MOD */MOD */ Reason: The difference between the division behaviors in Forth 79 and Forth 83 was a  point of much contention, and many Forth implementations did not switch to the Forth 83 behavior. Both  variants have vocal proponents, citing both application requirements and execution efficiency arguments on  both sides. After extensive debate spanning many meetings, the committee was unable to reach a consensus  for choosing one behavior over the other, and chose to allow either behavior as the default, while providing  a means for the user to explicitly use both behaviors as needed. Since implementors are allowed to choose  either behavior, they are not required to change the behavior exhibited by their current systems, thus  preserving correct functioning of existing programs that run on those systems and depend on a particular  behavior. New implementations could choose to supply the behavior that is supported by the native CPU  instruction set, thus maximizing execution speed, or could choose the behavior that is most appropriate for  the intended application domain of the system.
Impact: The issue only affects programs that use a negative dividend with a positive  divisor, or a positive dividend with a negative divisor. The vast majority of uses of division occur with both  a positive dividend and a positive divisor; in that case, the results are the same for both allowed division  behaviors.
: /MOD ( n1 n2 -- n3 n4 ) >R S>D R> FM/MOD ; 
: MOD ( n1 n2 -- n3 ) /MOD DROP ; 
: / ( n1 n2 -- n3 ) /MOD SWAP DROP ; 
: */MOD ( n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5 ) >R M* R> FM/MOD ; 
: */ ( n1 n2 n3 -- n4 n5 ) */MOD SWAP DROP ; 

### D.6.7 Immediacy 

Transition/Conversion: For programs that require a specific rounding behavior with division operands of  mixed sign, the division operators used by the program may be redefined in terms of one of the new ANS  Forth division primitives SM/REM (symmetrical division, i.e., round toward zero) or FM/MOD (floored  division, i.e., round toward negative infinity). Then the program may be recompiled without change. For  example, the Forth 83 style division operators may be defined by:  Forth 83 specified that a number of “compiling words” are “immediate”, meaning that they are executed  instead of compiled during compilation. ANS Forth is less specific about most of these words, stating that  their behavior is only defined during compilation, and specifying their results rather than their specific  compile-time actions.
To force the compilation of a word that would normally be executed, Forth 83 provided the words  COMPILE , used with non-immediate words, and [COMPILE] , used with immediate words. ANS Forth  provides the single word POSTPONE , which is used with both immediate and non-immediate words,  automatically selecting the appropriate behavior.
Words Affected: COMPILE [COMPILE] ['] ' Reason: The designation of particular words as either immediate or not depends upon the  implementation technique chosen for the Forth system. With traditional “threaded code” implementations,  the choice was generally quite clear (with the single exception of the word LEAVE), and the standard could  specify which words should be immediate. However, some of the currently popular implementation  techniques, such as native-code generation with optimization, require the immediacy attribute on a different  set of words than the set of immediate words of a threaded code implementation. ANS Forth,  acknowledging the validity of these other implementation techniques, specifies the immediacy attribute in as  few cases as possible.
When the membership of the set of immediate words is unclear, the decision about whether to use  COMPILE or [COMPILE] becomes unclear. Consequently, ANS Forth provides a “general purpose”  replacement word POSTPONE that serves the purpose of the vast majority of uses of both COMPILE and  [COMPILE], without requiring that the user know whether or not the “postponed” word is immediate.
Similarly, the use of ' and ['] with compiling words is unclear if the precise compilation behavior of those  words is not specified, so ANS Forth does not permit a Standard Program to use ' or ['] with compiling  words.
The traditional (non-immediate) definition of the word COMPILE has an additional problem. Its traditional  definition assumes a threaded code implementation technique, and its behavior can only be properly  described in that context. In the context of ANS Forth, which permits other implementation techniques in  addition to threaded code, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to describe the behavior of the traditional  COMPILE. Rather than changing its behavior, and thus breaking existing code, ANS Forth does not include  the word COMPILE. This allows existing implementations to continue to supply the word COMPILE with  its traditional behavior, if that is appropriate for the implementation.
(required) core word set, having been moved to the Core Extensions word set, but the committee anticipates 
Impact: [COMPILE] remains in ANS Forth, since its proper use does not depend on  knowledge of whether or not a word is immediate (Use of [COMPILE] with a non-immediate word is and  has always been a no-op). Whether or not you need to use [COMPILE] requires knowledge of whether or  not its target word is immediate, but it is always safe to use [COMPILE]. [COMPILE] is no longer in the  that most vendors will supply it anyway.
[COMPILE] and COMPILE that are not suitable for “mindless” replacement by POSTPONE are quite 
In nearly all cases, it is correct to replace both [COMPILE] and COMPILE with POSTPONE. Uses of  infrequent, and fall into the following two categories:  a) Use of [COMPILE] with non-immediate words. This is sometimes done with the words ' (tick, which  was immediate in Forth 79 but not in Forth 83) and LEAVE (which was immediate in Forth 83 but not  in Forth 79), in order to force the compilation of those words without regard to whether you are using a  Forth 79 or Forth 83 system.
b) Use of the phrase COMPILE [COMPILE] <immediate word> to “doubly postpone” an  immediate word.
Transition/Conversion: Many ANS Forth implementations will continue to implement both [COMPILE] and COMPILE in forms compatible with existing usage. In those environments, no conversion is necessary.
For complete portability, uses of COMPILE and [COMPILE] should be changed to POSTPONE , except in  the rare cases indicated above. Uses of [COMPILE] with non-immediate words may be left as-is, and the  program may declare a requirement for the word [COMPILE] from the Core Extensions word set, or the  [COMPILE] before the non-immediate word may be simply deleted if the target word is known to be nonimmediate.
“intermediate word” (XX in the example below) and then postponing that word. For example: 
: ABC COMPILE [COMPILE] IF ; 
: XX POSTPONE IF ; 
: ABC POSTPONE XX ; 
: XYZ COMPILE [ ' ABC , ] ; 
Uses of the phrase COMPILE [COMPILE] <immediate-word> may be handled by introducing an  changes to:  A non-standard case can occur with programs that “switch out of compilation state” to explicitly compile a  thread in the dictionary following a COMPILE . For example:  This depends heavily on knowledge of exactly how COMPILE and the threaded-code implementation  works. Cases like this cannot be handled mechanically; they must be translated by understanding exactly  what the code is doing, and rewriting that section according to ANS Forth restrictions.
Use the phrase POSTPONE [COMPILE] to replace [COMPILE] [COMPILE].

### D.6.8 Input character set 

Forth 83 specifies that the full 7-bit ASCII character set is available through KEY . ANS Forth restricts it to  the graphic characters of the ASCII set, with codes from hex 20 to hex 7E inclusive.
Words Affected: KEY Reason: Many system environments “consume” certain control characters for such  purposes as input editing, job control, or flow control. A Forth implementation cannot always control this  system behavior.
Impact: Standard Programs which require the ability to receive particular control  characters through KEY must declare an environmental dependency on the input character set.
Transition/Conversion: For maximum portability, programs should restrict their required input character  set to only the graphic characters. Control characters may be handled if available, but complete program  functionality should be accessible using only graphic characters.
As stated above, an environmental dependency on the input character set may be declared. Even so, it is  recommended that the program should avoid the requirement for particularly-troublesome control  characters, such as control-S and control-Q (often used for flow control, sometimes by communication  hardware whose presence may be difficult to detect), ASCII NUL (difficult to type on many keyboards), and  the distinction between carriage return and line feed (some systems translate carriage returns into line feeds,  or vice versa).

### D.6.9 Shifting with UM/MOD 

Given Forth-83’s two’s-complement nature, and its requirement for floored (round toward minus infinity)  division, shifting is equivalent to division. Also, two’s-complement representation implies that unsigned  division by a power of two is equivalent to logical right-shifting, so UM/MOD could be used to perform a  logical right-shift.
Words Affected: UM/MOD Reason: The problem with UM/MOD is a result of allowing non-two’s-complement  number representations, as already described.
ANS Forth provides the words LSHIFT and RSHIFT to perform logical shifts. This is usually more  efficient, and certainly more descriptive, than the use of UM/MOD for logical shifting.
Impact: Programs running on ANS Forth systems with two’s-complement arithmetic (the  majority of machines), will not experience any incompatibility with UM/MOD . Existing Forth-83 Standard  programs intended to run on non-two’s-complement machines will not be able to use UM/MOD for shifting  on a non-two’s-complement ANS Forth system. This should not affect a significant number of existing  programs (perhaps none at all), since the committee knows of no existing Forth-83 implementations on nontwo’s-complement machines.
Transition/Conversion: A program that requires UM/MOD to behave as a shift operation may declare an  environmental dependency on two’s-complement arithmetic.
A program that cannot declare an environmental dependency on two’s-complement arithmetic may require  editing to replace incompatible uses of UM/MOD with other operators defined within the application.

### D.6.10 Vocabularies / wordlists 

ANS Forth does not define the words VOCABULARY, CONTEXT, and CURRENT , which were present in  Forth 83. Instead, ANS Forth defines a primitive word set for search order specification and control,  including words which have not existed in any previous standard.
Forth-83’s “ALSO/ONLY” experimental search order word set is specified for the most part as the extension  portion of the ANS Forth Search Order word set.
Words Affected: VOCABULARY CONTEXT CURRENT Reason: Vocabularies are an area of much divergence among existing systems.
Considering major vendors’ systems and previous standards, there are at least 5 different and mutually  incompatible behaviors of words defined by VOCABULARY. Forth 83 took a step in the direction of “runtime search-order specification” by declining to specify a specific relationship between the hierarchy of  compiled vocabularies and the run-time search order. Forth 83 also specified an experimental mechanism  for run-time search-order specification, the ALSO/ONLY scheme. ALSO/ONLY was implemented in  numerous systems, and has achieved some measure of popularity in the Forth community.
However, several vendors refuse to implement it, citing technical limitations. In an effort to address those  limitations and thus hopefully make ALSO/ONLY more palatable to its critics, the committee specified a  simple “primitive word set” that not only fixes some of the objections to ALSO/ONLY, but also provides  sufficient power to implement ALSO/ONLY and all of the other search-order word sets that are currently  popular.
The Forth 83 ALSO/ONLY word set is provided as an optional extension to the search-order word set. This  allows implementors that are so inclined to provide this word set, with well-defined standard behavior, but  does not compel implementors to do so. Some vendors have publicly stated that they will not implement  ALSO/ONLY, no matter what, and one major vendor stated an unwillingness to implement ANS Forth at all  if ALSO/ONLY is mandated. The committee feels that its actions are prudent, specifying ALSO/ONLY to the  extent possible without mandating its inclusion in all systems, and also providing a primitive search-order  word set that vendors may be more likely to implement, and which can be used to synthesize ALSO/ONLY.
Transition/Conversion: Since Forth 83 did not mandate precise semantics for VOCABULARY, existing  Forth-83 Standard programs cannot use it except in a trivial way. Programs can declare a dependency on  the existence of the Search Order word set, and can implement whatever semantics are required using that  word set’s primitives. Forth 83 programs that need ALSO/ONLY can declare a dependency on the Search  Order Extensions word set, or can implement the extensions in terms of the Search Order word set itself.

### D.6.11 Multiprogramming impact 

Forth 83 marked words with “multiprogramming impact” by the letter “M” in the first lines of their  descriptions. ANS Forth has removed the “M” designation from the word descriptions, moving the  discussion of multiprogramming impact to this non-normative annex.
Words affected: none  Reason: The meaning of “multiprogramming impact” is precise only in the context of a  specific model for multiprogramming. Although many Forth systems do provide multiprogramming  capabilities using a particular round-robin, cooperative, block-buffer sharing model, that model is not  universal. Even assuming the classical model, the “M” designations did not contain enough information to  enable writing of applications that interacted in a multiprogrammed system.
Practically speaking, the “M” designations in Forth 83 served to document usage rules for block buffer  addresses in multiprogrammed systems. These addresses often become meaningless after a task has  relinquished the CPU for any reason, most often for the purposes of performing I/O, awaiting an event, or  voluntarily sharing CPU resources using the word PAUSE. It was essential that portable applications  respect those usage rules to make it practical to run them on multiprogrammed systems; failure to adhere to  the rules could easily compromise the integrity of other applications running on those systems as well as the  applications actually in error. Thus, “M” appeared on all words that by design gave up the CPU, with the  understanding that other words NEVER gave it up.
These usage rules have been explicitly documented in the Block word set where they are relevant. The “M”  designations have been removed entirely.
Impact: In practice, none.
In the sense that any application that depends on multiprogramming must consist of at least two tasks that  share some resource(s) and communicate between themselves, Forth 83 did not contain enough information  to enable writing of a standard program that DEPENDED on multiprogramming. This is also true of ANS  Forth.
Non-multiprogrammed applications in Forth 83 were required to respect usage rules for BLOCK so that they  could be run properly on multiprogrammed systems. The same is true of ANS Forth.
The only difference is the documentation method used to define the BLOCK usage rules. The Technical  Committee believes that the current method is clearer than the concept of “multiprogramming impact”.
Transition/Conversion: none needed.

### D.6.12 Words not provided in executable form 

ANS Forth allows an implementation to supply some words in source code or “load as needed” form, rather  than requiring all supplied words to be available with no additional programmer action.
Words affected: all  Reason: Forth systems are often used in environments where memory space is at a  premium. Every word included in the system in executable form consumes memory space. The committee  believes that allowing standard words to be provided in source form will increase the probability that  implementors will provide complete ANS Forth implementations even in systems designed for use in  constrained environments.
Impact: In order to use a Standard Program with a given ANS Forth implementation, it  may be necessary to precede the program with an implementation-dependent “preface” to make “source  form” words executable. This is similar to the methods that other computer languages require for selecting  the library routines needed by a particular application.
In languages like C, the goal of eliminating unnecessary routines from the memory image of an application  is usually accomplished by providing libraries of routines, using a “linker” program to incorporate only the  necessary routines into an executable application. The method of invoking and controlling the linker is  outside the scope of the language definition.
Transition/Conversion: Before compiling a program, the programmer may need to perform some action  to make the words required by that program available for execution.
E. ANS Forth portability guide (informative annex)  E.1 Introduction  The most popular architectures used to implement Forth have had byte-addressed memory, 16-bit  operations, and two’s-complement number representation. The Forth-83 Standard dictates that these  particular features must be present in a Forth-83 Standard system and that Forth-83 programs may exploit  these features freely.
32-bit operations, or represent numbers in one’s complement. Since one of Forth’s strengths is its 
However, there are many beasts in the architectural jungle that are bit addressed or cell addressed, or prefer  usefulness in “strange” environments on “unusual” hardware with “peculiar” features, it is important that a  Standard Forth run on these machines too.
A primary goal of the ANS Forth Standard is to increase the types of machines that can support a Standard  Forth. This is accomplished by allowing some key Forth terms to be implementation-defined (e.g., how big  is a cell?) and by providing Forth operators (words) that conceal the implementation. This frees the  implementor to produce the Forth system that most effectively utilizes the native hardware. The machine  independent operators, together with some programmer discipline, enable a programmer to write Forth  programs that work on a wide variety of machines.
The remainder of this Annex provides guidelines for writing portable ANS Forth programs. The first  section describes ways to make a program hardware independent. It is difficult for someone familiar with  only one machine architecture to imagine the problems caused by transporting programs between dissimilar  machines. Consequently, examples of specific architectures with their respective problems are given. The  second section describes assumptions about Forth implementations that many programmers make, but can’t  be relied upon in a portable program.
E.2 Hardware peculiarities  E.2.1 Data/memory abstraction  Data and memory are the stones and mortar of program construction. Unfortunately, each computer treats  data and memory differently. The ANS Forth Systems Standard gives definitions of data and memory that  apply to a wide variety of computers. These definitions give us a way to talk about the common elements of  data and memory while ignoring the details of specific hardware. Similarly, ANS Forth programs that use  data and memory in ways that conform to these definitions can also ignore hardware details. The following  sections discuss the definitions and describe how to write programs that are independent of the data/memory  peculiarities of different computers.
E.2.2 Definitions  Three terms defined by ANS Forth are address unit, cell, and character. The address space of an ANS Forth  system is divided into an array of address units; an address unit is the smallest collection of bits that can be  addressed. In other words, an address unit is the number of bits spanned by the addresses addr and addr+1.
8086 and Motorola 68000 families. However, other address unit sizes exist. There are machines that are bit 
The most prevalent machines use 8-bit address units. Such “byte addressed” machines include the Intel  addressed and machines that are 4-bit nibble addressed. There are also machines with address units larger  than 8-bits. For example, several Forth-in-hardware computers are cell addressed.
18 or 36-bit cells respectively. In all of these systems, DUP does the same thing: it duplicates the top of the 
The cell is the fundamental data type of a Forth system. A cell can be a single-cell integer or a memory  address. Forth’s parameter and return stacks are stacks of cells. Forth 83 specifies that a cell is 16-bits. In  ANS Forth the size of a cell is an implementation-defined number of address units. Thus, an ANS Forth  implemented on a 16-bit microprocessor could use a 16-bit cell and an implementation on a 32-bit machine  could use a 32-bit cell. Also 18-bit machines, 36-bit machines, etc., could support ANS Forth systems with  data stack. ! (store) behaves consistently too: given two cells on the data stack it stores the second cell in  the memory location designated by the top cell.
Similarly, the definition of a character has been generalized to be an implementation-defined number of  address units (but at least eight bits). This removes the need for a Forth implementor to provide 8-bit  characters on processors where it is inappropriate. For example, on an 18-bit machine with a 9-bit address  unit, a 9-bit character would be most convenient. Since, by definition, you can’t address anything smaller  than an address unit, a character must be at least as big as an address unit. This will result in big characters  on machines with large address units. An example is a 16-bit cell addressed machine where a 16-bit  character makes the most sense.
E.2.3 Addressing memory  ANS Forth eliminates many portability problems by using the above definitions. One of the most common  portability problems is addressing successive cells in memory. Given the memory address of a cell, how do  you find the address of the next cell? In Forth 83 this is easy: 2 + . This code assumes that memory is  addressed in 8-bit units (bytes) and a cell is 16-bits wide. On a byte-addressed machine with 32-bit cells the  code to find the next cell would be 4 + . The code would be 1+ on a cell-addressed processor and 16 + on a bit-addressed processor with 16-bit cells. ANS Forth provides a next-cell operator named CELL+ that  can be used in all of these cases. Given an address, CELL+ adjusts the address by the size of a cell  (measured in address units). A related problem is that of addressing an array of cells in an arbitrary order.
: ARRAY CREATE 2* ALLOT DOES> SWAP 2* + ; 
: ARRAY CREATE CELLS ALLOT 
 DOES> SWAP CELLS + ; 
A defining word to create an array of cells using Forth 83 would be:  Use of 2* to scale the array index assumes byte addressing and 16-bit cells again. As in the example above,  different versions of the code would be needed for different machines. ANS Forth provides a portable  scaling operator named CELLS. Given a number n, CELLS returns the number of address units needed to  hold n cells. A portable definition of array is:  There are also portability problems with addressing arrays of characters. In Forth 83 (and in the most  common ANS Forth implementations), the size of a character will equal the size of an address unit.
(2) systems with large character sets (e.g., 16-bit characters on a byte-addressed machine). CHAR+ and 
Consequently addresses of successive characters in memory can be found using 1+ and scaling indices into  a character array is a no-op (i.e., 1 *). However, there are cases where a character is larger than an address  unit. Examples include (1) systems with small address units (e.g., bit- and nibble-addressed systems), and  CHARS operators, analogous to CELL+ and CELLS are available to allow maximum portability.
ANS Forth generalizes the definition of some Forth words that operate on chunks of memory to use address  units. One example is ALLOT. By prefixing ALLOT with the appropriate scaling operator (CELLS,  CHARS, etc.), space for any desired data structure can be allocated (see definition of array above). For  example:  CREATE ABUFFER 5 CHARS ALLOT ( allot 5 character buffer)  The memory-block-move word also uses address units:  source destination 8 CELLS MOVE ( move 8 cells)  E.2.4 Alignment problems  Not all addresses are created equal. Many processors have restrictions on the addresses that can be used by  memory access instructions. This Standard does not require an implementor of an ANS Forth to make  alignment transparent; on the contrary, it requires (in Section 3.3.3.1 Address alignment) that an ANS  Forth program assume that character and cell alignment may be required.
One of the most common problems caused by alignment restrictions is in creating tables containing both  characters and cells. When , (comma) or C, is used to initialize a table, data is stored at the data-space  pointer. Consequently, it must be suitably aligned. For example, a non-portable table definition would be:  CREATE ATABLE 1 C, X , 2 C, Y ,  On a machine that restricts 16-bit fetches to even addresses, CREATE would leave the data space pointer at  an even address, the 1 C, would make the data space pointer odd, and , (comma) would violate the  address restriction by storing X at an odd address. A portable way to create the table is:  CREATE ATABLE 1 C, ALIGN X , 2 C, ALIGN Y ,  ALIGN adjusts the data space pointer to the first aligned address greater than or equal to its current address.
An aligned address is suitable for storing or fetching characters, cells, cell pairs, or double-cell numbers.
After initializing the table, we would also like to read values from the table. For example, assume we want  to fetch the first cell, X, from the table. ATABLE CHAR+ gives the address of the first thing after the  character. However this may not be the address of X since we aligned the dictionary pointer between the C, and the ,. The portable way to get the address of X is:  ATABLE CHAR+ ALIGNED  ALIGNED adjusts the address on top of the stack to the first aligned address greater than or equal to its  current value.
E.3 Number representation  Different computers represent numbers in different ways. An awareness of these differences can help a  programmer avoid writing a program that depends on a particular representation.
E.3.1 Big endian vs. little endian  The constituent bits of a number in memory are kept in different orders on different machines. Some  machines place the most-significant part of a number at an address in memory with less-significant parts  following it at higher addresses. Other machines do the opposite — the least-significant part is stored at the  lowest address. For example, the following code for a 16-bit 8086 “little endian” Forth would produce the  answer 34 (hex):  VARIABLE FOO HEX 1234 FOO ! FOO C@  The same code on a 16-bit 68000 “big endian” Forth would produce the answer 12 (hex). A portable  program cannot exploit the representation of a number in memory.
A related issue is the representation of cell pairs and double-cell numbers in memory. When a cell pair is  moved from the stack to memory with 2!, the cell that was on top of the stack is placed at the lower  memory address. It is useful and reasonable to manipulate the individual cells when they are in memory.
(BCD, etc.). Each of these formats creates advantages and disadvantages in the design of a computer’s 
E.3.2 ALU organization  Different computers use different bit patterns to represent integers. Possibilities include binary  representations (two’s complement, one’s complement, sign magnitude, etc.) and decimal representations  arithmetic logic unit (ALU). The most commonly used representation, two’s complement, is popular  because of the simplicity of its addition and subtraction algorithms.
Programmers who have grown up on two’s complement machines tend to become intimate with their  representation of numbers and take some properties of that representation for granted. For example, a trick  to find the remainder of a number divided by a power of two is to mask off some bits with AND. A common  application of this trick is to test a number for oddness using 1 AND. However, this will not work on a  one’s complement machine if the number is negative (a portable technique is 2 MOD).
The remainder of this section is a (non-exhaustive) list of things to watch for when portability between  machines with binary representations other than two’s complement is desired.
To convert a single-cell number to a double-cell number, ANS Forth provides the operator S>D. To  convert a double-cell number to single-cell, Forth programmers have traditionally used DROP. However,  this trick doesn’t work on sign-magnitude machines. For portability a D>S operator is available.
Converting an unsigned single-cell number to a double-cell number can be done portably by pushing a zero  on the stack.
E.4 Forth system implementation  During Forth’s history, an amazing variety of implementation techniques have been developed. The ANS  Forth Standard encourages this diversity and consequently restricts the assumptions a user can make about  the underlying implementation of an ANS Forth system. Users of a particular Forth implementation  frequently become accustomed to aspects of the implementation and assume they are common to all Forths.
This section points out many of these incorrect assumptions.
. No method for accessing these fields has been found 
E.4.1 Definitions  Traditionally, Forth definitions have consisted of the name of the Forth word, a dictionary search link, data  describing how to execute the definition, and parameters describing the definition itself. These components  are called the name, link, code, and parameter fields3 that works across all of the Forth implementations currently in use. Therefore, ANS Forth severely restricts  how the fields may be used. Specifically, a portable ANS Forth program may not use the name, link, or  code field in any way. Use of the parameter field (renamed to data field for clarity) is limited to the  operations described below.
: , etc., may have no data fields. There is no way for a Standard Program to modify the value of a constant 
Only words defined with CREATE or with other defining words that call CREATE have data fields. The  other defining words in the Standard (VARIABLE, CONSTANT, :, etc.) might not be implemented with  CREATE. Consequently, a Standard Program must assume that words defined by VARIABLE, CONSTANT,  or to change the meaning of a colon definition. The DOES> part of a defining word operates on a data field.
Since only CREATEd words have data fields, DOES> can only be paired with CREATE or words that call  CREATE.
In ANS Forth, FIND, ['] and ' (tick) return an unspecified entity called an “execution token”. There are  only a few things that may be done with an execution token. The token may be passed to EXECUTE to  execute the word ticked or compiled into the current definition with COMPILE,. The token can also be  stored in a variable and used later. Finally, if the word ticked was defined via CREATE, >BODY converts  the execution token into the word’s data-field address.
One thing that definitely cannot be done with an execution token is use ! or , to store it into the object code  of a Forth definition. This technique is sometimes used in implementations where the object code is a list of  addresses (threaded code) and an execution token is also an address. However, ANS Forth permits native  code implementations where this will not work.
E.4.2 Stacks  In some Forth implementations, it is possible to find the address of a stack in memory and manipulate the  stack as an array of cells. This technique is not portable, however. On some systems, especially Forth-inhardware systems, the stacks might be in a part of memory that can’t be addressed by the program or might  not be in memory at all. Forth’s parameter and return stacks must be treated as stacks.
 
A Standard Program may use the return stack directly only for temporarily storing values. Every value  examined or removed from the return stack using R@, R>, or 2R> must have been put on the stack explicitly  > 3 footnote These terms are not defined in the Standard. They are mentioned here for historical continuity.

using >R or 2>R. Even this must be done carefully since the system may use the return stack to hold return  addresses and loop-control parameters. Section 3.2.3.3 Return stack of the Standard has a list of  restrictions.
E.5 ROMed application disciplines and conventions  When a Standard System provides a data space which is uniformly readable and writeable we may term this  environment “RAM-only”.
Programs designed for ROMed application must divide data space into at least two parts: a writeable and  readable uninitialized part, called “RAM”, and a read-only initialized part, called “ROM”. A third  possibility, a writeable and readable initialized part, normally called “initialized RAM”, is not addressed by  this discipline. A Standard Program must explicitly initialize the RAM data space as needed.
The separation of data space into RAM and ROM is meaningful only during the generation of the ROMed  program. If the ROMed program is itself a standard development system, it has the same taxonomy as an  ordinary RAM-only system.
, (comma) ALIGN ALIGNED ALLOT C, CREATE HERE UNUSED
(VARIABLE always accesses the RAM data space.) 
The words affected by conversion from a RAM-only to a mixed RAM and ROM environment are:  With the exception of , (comma) and C, these words are meaningful in both RAM and ROM data space.
To select the data space, these words could be preceded by selectors RAM and ROM. For example:  ROM CREATE ONES 32 ALLOT ONES 32 1 FILL RAM  would create a table of ones in the ROM data space. The storage of data into RAM data space when  generating a program for ROM would be an ambiguous condition.
A straightforward implementation of these selectors would maintain separate address counters for each  space. A counter value would be returned by HERE and altered by , (comma), C,, ALIGN, and ALLOT,  with RAM and ROM simply selecting the appropriate address counter. This technique could be extended to  additional partitions of the data space.
E.6 Summary  The ANS Forth Standard cannot and should not force anyone to write a portable program. In situations  where performance is paramount, the programmer is encouraged to use every trick in the book. On the  other hand, if portability to a wide variety of systems is needed, ANS Forth provides the tools to accomplish  this. There is probably no such thing as a completely portable program. A programmer, using this guide,  should intelligently weigh the tradeoffs of providing portability to specific machines. For example,  machines that use sign-magnitude numbers are rare and probably don’t deserve much thought. But, systems  with different cell sizes will certainly be encountered and should be provided for. In general, making a  program portable clarifies both the programmer’s thinking process and the final program.
F. Alphabetic list of words (informative annex)  In the following list, the last, four-digit, part of the reference number establishes a sequence corresponding  to the alphabetic ordering of all standard words. The first two or three parts indicate the word set and  glossary section in which the word is defined.

### LIST OF WORDS(low.md) SHOULD BE HERE
